---
title: "Continuations and Aspects to Tame Callback Hell on the Web"
collection: publications_wos
permalink: /publication/wos/legerAl-jucs2021
year: 2021
date: 2021-08-01
author: 'Paul Leger, Hiroaki Fukuda, Ismael Figueroa'
venue: 'Journal of Universal Computer Science'
quartil: 3
---

# Abstract

JavaScript is one of the main programming languages to develop highly rich
responsive and interactive Web applications. In these kinds of applications,
the use of asynchronous operations that execute callbacks is crucial. However,
the dependency among nested callbacks, known as callback hell, can make it
difficult to understand and maintain them, which will eventually mix concerns.
Unfortunately, current solutions for JavaScript do not fully address the
aforementioned issue. This paper presents Sync/cc, a JavaScript package that
works on modern browsers. This package is a proof-of-concept that uses
continuations and aspects that allow developers to write event handlers that
need nested callbacks in a synchronous style, preventing callback hell. Unlike
current solutions, Sync/cc is modular, succinct, and customizable because it
does not require ad-hoc and scattered constructs, code refactoring, or adding
ad-hoc implementations such as state machines. In practice, our proposal uses
a) continuations to only suspend the current handler execution until the
asynchronous operation is resolved, and b) aspects to apply continuations in a
non-intrusive way. We test Sync/cc with a management information system that
administers courses at a university in Chile.