---
title: "Interfaces for Modular Reasoning in Context-Oriented Programming"
collection: publications_scopus
permalink: /publication/scopus/legerAl-cop2020
year: 2020
date: 2020-07-21
venue: 'International Workshop on Context-Oriented Programming and Advanced Modularity (COP)'
paperurl: 'https://prg.is.titech.ac.jp/members/masuhara/papers/cop2020draft.pdf'
author: Paul Leger, Hidehiko Masuhara, Ismael Figueroa
---

# Abstract

Different activation mechanisms for Context-Oriented Programming (COP) like
implicit activations have been proposed, increasing COP opportunities to be
applied in real scenarios. However, activation mechanisms and base code
definitions are insufficiently decoupled, as conditionals to activate layers
require base code variable references. This hinders reuse, evolution, and
modular reasoning of COP and base code, and therefore, uses of COP in real
scenarios. This paper proposes Activation Interfaces (AIs), which are shared
abstractions to communicate activation mechanisms and base code in a decoupled
manner. Using these interfaces, an object can exhibit its internal state and
behaviors, and conditionals use them to (de) activate layers. As layers are
planned to be (re) used in different applications, developers can use AIs to
overcome the incompatibility between values exposed by a particular base code
and values required by a layer. In addition, as a layer is a plain object, it
can use an AI to exhibit the conditional evaluation of its activation to other
layers to resolve conflicts among activations of layers. We apply this proposal
to implicit activations in which evaluations of conditionals implicitly (de)
activate layers. Finally, we illustrate the benefits of this proposal through
RAI-JS, a practical JavaScript library that currently supports AIs, reactive
activations (implementation variant for implicit activations), global and
dynamic deployment, enter and exit transition processes, and partial methods.