---
title: "Toward Distributed Streaming Data Sharing Manager for Autonomous Robot Control"
collection: publications_scopus
permalink: /publication/scopus/fukudaAl-sii2020
year: 2020
date: 2020-01-12
venue: 'International Conference on Computer Supported Education'
paperurl: 'https://pleger.cl/cv-pleger/papers/fukudaAl-sii2020.pdf'
author: Hiroaki Fukuda, Ryota Gunji, Tadahiro Hasegawa, Paul Leger, Ismael Figueroa
---

# Abstract

Using robots is demanding for supporting our lives and/or covering works that
are not suitable for human beings. The robot software implementation requires a
variety of knowledge and experiences. Thereby developing cost for such software
systems is now increasing. Middleware systems such as Robot Operating System
(ROS) are being developed to decrease such cost and widely used. Streaming data
Sharing Manager (SSM) is one of such middleware systems that allow developers
to write and read sensor data with timestamps using a common PC. This feature
enables developers to control a robot by taking account of measured time. This
control is important because using multiple sensor data with different
timestamp cannot allow developers to control a robot correctly. SSM assumes
that only one PC is used to control a robot, therefore if it exists a process
that consumes much CPU resource, other processes cannot finish their assumed
deadlines, leading to the unexpected behavior of a robot. This paper proposes
an architecture called Distributed Streaming data Sharing Manager (DSSM) that
enables to distributing each process on existing SSM to different PCs. We
investigate the current architecture and behavior of SSM, then propose a new
architecture that can achieve our goal. Finally, we apply DSSM to an existing
SSM based robot control system that autonomously controls an unmanned vehicle,
then confirm the effectiveness of DSSM by measuring the resource usages.