---
title: "Evolution of a Haskell Repository and its Use of Monads: An Exploratory Study of Stackage"
collection: publications_scopus
permalink: /publication/scopus/legerAl-sac2022
year: 2022
date: 2022-04-01
venue: "ACM Symposium on Applied Computing"
paperurl: "https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3477314.3506982"
author: Paul Leger, Felipe Ruiz, Nicolás Sepúlveda, Ismael Figueroa
doi: 10.1145/3477314.3506982
---

# Abstract

Package repositories for a programming language are increasingly common. A
repository can keep a register of the evolution of its packages. In the
programming language Haskell, with its defining characteristic monads, we can
find the Stackage repository, which is a curated repository for stable Haskell
packages in the Hackage repository. Despite the widespread use of Stackage in
its industrial target, we are not aware of much empirical research about how
this repository has evolved, including the use of monads. This paper presents
an empirical study that covers the evolution of fourteen Long-Term Support
(LTS) releases (period 2014 - 2020) of available packages (12.46 gigabytes),
including the use of monads from the mtl package that provides the standard
monad core (e.g., state, reader, continuations). To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first large-scale analysis of the evolution of the Stackage
repository with regard to packages used and monads. Our findings show, for
example, a growing trend of packages is depending on other packages whose
versions are not available in a particular release of Stackage; opening a
potential stability issue. Like previous studies, these results may evidence
how developers use Haskell and give guidelines to Stackage maintainers.
